Welcome to our special coverage here on
aler where as of Tuesday May the 28th
Norway Ireland and Spain have all
formally recognized Palestine as a state
it's a historic move reflecting the
growing calls for a peaceful resolution
to a 76-year conflict and an end to
Israel's occupation it also reasserts
the Palestinian people's right to
self-determination now more than 7
months into Israel's devastating war on
Gaza the chorus of voices denouncing the
violence and impu is growing louder
Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin
Netanyahu is increasingly isolated he's
facing various legal challenges before
two of the world's top courts with
accusations of genocide and war crimes
Norway Spain and Ireland are in good
company most of the world supports
Palestinian statehood more than 140 of
the 193 members of the UN General
Assembly recognize it the momentum too
is building Slovenia and Malta have also
said that they're considering formal
recognition and more countries could
also follow suit Spanish prime minister
Pedro Sanchez has just spoken ahead of a
cabinet meeting that will then formally
recognize Palestine he says the decision
is essential for peace in the Middle
East this is a historic decision that
has a single goal to contribute to
achieving peace between Israelis and
Palestines the recognition of the State
of Palestine is not only a matter of
historical Justice with the legitim
aspirations of the Palestine people but
it is also an imperative need to achieve
peace it is uh the only way to realize
the solution that we all recognize as
the only possible one to achieve a
future of peace that of a Palestine
state that coexists alongside the state
of Israel in peace well prime minister
Sanchez also spoke about the next steps
that Spain will now take going
forward I would like to underline that
starting tomorrow we will focus all our
efforts to implement the two State
solution and make it a reality we will
work on three main priorities first we
must urgently put an end to the ongoing
unprecedent crisis in Gaza I call once
again for permanent ceasefire for the
entry of humanitarian Aid and for the
immediate release of all the Israeli
hostages held by Hamas secondly we will
support Palestine National Authority in
the reform process initiated by its new
government the Palestine Authority is
our partner for peace and it will need
all of our
support and finally we will continue to
Foster cooperation with our Arab
Partners who are working and uh
committed towards peace and prosperity
in the region we will continue working
with them with the aim of convening an
International Peace conference to
implement a two State solution all the
latest there Paul a real statement this
morning from from prime minister
Sanchez indeed uh highly symbolic
momentous frankly uh he gave the
statement in the Palace of moncla which
is behind me uh just a statement it
wasn't a news conference uh Us Media
have been kept outside here you can
probably see it's the inauspicious
surroundings of a car park outside the
palace unfortunately but what he had to
say inside uh really will uh you know
have significance all around the world
you you've already played some of the
two I think most uh momentous Parts o of
his speech but there were other parts as
well that I would highlight for example
where he said that all our resolutions
all the Spanish resolutions Spain Norway
and Ireland are in line with existing un
resolutions as adopted by European Union
member states and that I think is very
important to emphasize that this isn't
Spain Ireland and Norway going it alone
somehow in some kind of Maverick way all
of the statement the recognition of
Palestine as a state is is totally in
line uh with the membership of the UN
and the membership of the uh European
Union um I think the other thing that
I've been detecting while I've been here
in Madrid is is a sense that the idea
that the United States as the kind of
leader of this uh of negotiations with
Israel is is is is starting to wne I
think the Palestinians clearly have been
uh doing their diplomatic homework with
the Europeans in particular um you think
of back to the 2020 Abraham Accords the
normalization of relations between
Israel and the Arab states uh caused
alarm for the Palestinians and as a
result they've been talking uh in a very
concerted way with Europeans to to Ghana
support there fearing that the United
States are not going to take the
Palestinian cause seriously well this is
the product of those kinds of diplomatic
efforts uh by the Palestinians and if I
can say just finally you know to
reiterate what he said this recognition
by Spain Ireland and Norway is um not
just a a historical justice as he
described it but necessary he believes
uh for peace Paul Brennan there with all
the very latest for us this morning from
Madrid thank you
Paul make sure to subscribe to our
channel to get the latest news from aler